design/open/acl/rbac-to-acl.md, before:

# TLD for lakeFS Simplified Authorization: from RBAC to ACL

## Goal

As part of part of [simplifying auth*][auth-sec-update], simplify the lakeFS
authorization system to use ACLs instead of PBAC as exists currently.

A simple GUI will be available for placing users into groups and configuring
allowed access for each group.

The bedrock of authorization in lakeFS remains the policy engine.  This is a
well-tested proven solution.  Advanced users will be able to retain policies
if they deploy and configure a external authorization server.  However there
will be no authorization server in lakeFS itself.

## User experience

### Simplified user experience

This section does _not_ do mockups, we may have those separately.

#### Concepts

##### Permissions

A _permission_ allows a group of users to do something.  Users cannot create
permissions, lakeFS provides only these permissions:

| Permission | Allows                                     | Existing Group            |
|------------|--------------------------------------------|---------------------------|
| **Read**   | Read operations, creating access keys.     | Viewers                   |
| **Write**  | Allows all data read and write operations. | Developers                |
| **Super**  | Allows all operations except auth.         | SuperUsers (with changes) |
| **Admin**  | Allows all operations.                     | Admins                    |

In existing RBAC terms, the only permissions for non-admins are under `fs:*`
and those to manage own credentials(`AuthManageOwnCredentials`).  The latter
is given to all users.

Some service jobs such as GC must be run using a user with Admin permission.

##### Scopes

When granted to a group, permissions Read, Write, and Super may be _scoped_.
Then they apply only to a set of repositories.  It is not possible to scope
permission Admin: it includes global abilities that apply across repos, and
can modify granted permissions.

##### Grants

A group is _granted_ a single permission within a scope.  "Admin" permission
has no scope (grayed out in the GUI, and all repos are allowed).

#### Out: RBAC

Remove from the GUI the policy page and all references to policies, and from
`lakectl` all policy-related commands.  The API will no longer support these
operations, either.  It will return [405 Method Not Allowed][http-stat-405],
or alternatively [501 Unimplemented][http-stat-501] when called: it is now a
partial implementation of the auth* API.

#### In: ACLs

Every group on the list of groups on the Groups page uses the format:

| Group ID | Permission          | Created at | Repositories |
|----------|---------------------|------------|--------------|
| <name>   | Permission dropdown | datetime   | <number>     |

![Groups page has a dropdown to edit permission for each
group](./groups-with-perms.png)

This gives information about the group and allows editing its permission.

There are 4 default groups, named after the 4 permissions.  Each group is
global (applies for all repositories).

Clicking on the group takes us to the group's subpage with 2 tabs:

* **Members**: The current "Group Memberships" tab.
* **Repositories**: A list of configured repositories.

  This tab has an "all" toggle at the top.  If the permission is "Admin" the
  toggle is set and cannot be changed.  Otherwise it controls a selection of
  groups using the same GUI mechanism as used today for memberships (and for
  policies, ironically).

We shall add appropriate options to `lakectl` to control policies at the new
levels of granularity.

### Upgrade to simplified

On startup, lakeFS will check the KV schema version.  If it has not upgraded
to ACLs then lakeFS will check whether an upgrade is required:

* If the 4 basic policies have not been modified, and no other policies have
  been defined, and no users have attached policies: no upgrade is required.
  lakeFS will merely upgrade the KV schema version.
* Otherwise lakeFS will not start until an upgrade script runs.

#### The upgrade script

Admins will run the upgrade script if required to do so by lakeFS or if they
want to be very sure (for instance, there is a minor race condition if there
is more than one concurrent lakeFS).  We force admins to try the script on a
dry run using a `--yes` flag: without it, the script only prints the planned
changes.

The upgrade script will _ensure_ that the 4 default global groups exist, and
_modify_ existing groups to fit into the new ACLs scheme.

* When creating the 4 default global groups: if another group exists and has
  the desired name, upgrading will rename it by appending ".orig".  So after
  upgrading the 4 default global groups exist, with these known names.
* For any group, upgrading configured policies follows these rules, possibly
  **increasing** access:

  1. Any "Deny" rules are stripped, and a warning printed.
  1. "Manage own credentials" is added.
  1. If any actions outside of "fs:" are allowed, the group becomes an Admin
     group, a warning is printed, and no further changes apply.
  1. The upgrade script *unifies* repositories: If a permission applies to a
     set of repositories with a wildcard, permissions are unified to **all**
     repositories.  Otherwise they apply to the list of all repositories, in
     all the policies.
  1. The upgrade script *unifies* actions: it selects the _least_ permission
     of Read, Write, Super that contains all of the allowed actions.  If any
     allowed action contains a wildcard this still makes sense.
* The upgrade script prints the new permissions of the group.[^1]


[^1] Even JSON-diff cannot be used report detailed changes, as many policies
	 are unified into a single policy.

### PBAC user experience with external authorization server

If lakeFS is attached to an external authorization server, the existing PBAC
GUI may continue to be used.  It is not possible to use both types of GUI at
the same time: Moving from PBAC to simplified may only be performed once and
**will** lose configuration.

## Implementation

lakeFS enforcement will remain backed by PBAC.  We shall add a "ui" field to
policies.  It will contain a structure that backs the UI:

<table>
<tr><th>Read all repos</th><th>Read repos `foo`, `bar`</th></tr>
<tr><td>
```json
{
  "statement": [
    {
      "action": ["fs:List*", "fs:Read*"],
      "effect": "allow",
      "resource": "*"
    }
  ],
  "ui": {
    "permission": "Read",
    "repositories": { "all": true }
  }
}
```
</td><td>
```json
{
  "statement": [
    {
      "action": ["fs:List*", "fs:Read*"],
      "effect": "allow",
      "resource": "foo"
    }, {
      "action": ["fs:List*", "fs:Read*"],
      "effect": "allow",
      "resource": "bar"
    }
  ],
  "ui": {
    "permission": "Read",
    "repositories": { "list": ["foo", "bar"] }
  }
}
```
</td></tr>
</table>

The UI receives and edits only the ui sub-object.  lakeFS translates it back
to a statement when the UI posts it back.  In effect PBAC statements are the
materialized form of the ui sub-object.

## Milestones

- Review and accept design
- Server-side support: add ui sub-object and ui -> statement translations
- lakectl support for simplified mode
- GUI


[auth-sec-update]:  https://docs.lakefs.io/posts/security_update.html#whats-changing
[http-stat-405]:  https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Status/405
[http-stat-501]:  https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Status/501

Commit message:

[CR] Upgrade warnings should explain how to get more information

design/open/acl/rbac-to-acl.md, after:

# TLD for lakeFS Simplified Authorization: from RBAC to ACL

## Goal

As part of part of [simplifying auth*][auth-sec-update], simplify the lakeFS
authorization system to use ACLs instead of PBAC as exists currently.

A simple GUI will be available for placing users into groups and configuring
allowed access for each group.

The bedrock of authorization in lakeFS remains the policy engine.  This is a
well-tested proven solution.  Advanced users will be able to retain policies
if they deploy and configure a external authorization server.  However there
will be no authorization server in lakeFS itself.

## User experience

### Simplified user experience

This section does _not_ do mockups, we may have those separately.

#### Concepts

##### Permissions

A _permission_ allows a group of users to do something.  Users cannot create
permissions, lakeFS provides only these permissions:

| Permission | Allows                                     | Existing Group            |
|------------|--------------------------------------------|---------------------------|
| **Read**   | Read operations, creating access keys.     | Viewers                   |
| **Write**  | Allows all data read and write operations. | Developers                |
| **Super**  | Allows all operations except auth.         | SuperUsers (with changes) |
| **Admin**  | Allows all operations.                     | Admins                    |

In existing RBAC terms, the only permissions for non-admins are under `fs:*`
and those to manage own credentials(`AuthManageOwnCredentials`).  The latter
is given to all users.

Some service jobs such as GC must be run using a user with Admin permission.

##### Scopes

When granted to a group, permissions Read, Write, and Super may be _scoped_.
Then they apply only to a set of repositories.  It is not possible to scope
permission Admin: it includes global abilities that apply across repos, and
can modify granted permissions.

##### Grants

A group is _granted_ a single permission within a scope.  "Admin" permission
has no scope (grayed out in the GUI, and all repos are allowed).

#### Out: RBAC

Remove from the GUI the policy page and all references to policies, and from
`lakectl` all policy-related commands.  The API will no longer support these
operations, either.  It will return [405 Method Not Allowed][http-stat-405],
or alternatively [501 Unimplemented][http-stat-501] when called: it is now a
partial implementation of the auth* API.

#### In: ACLs

Every group on the list of groups on the Groups page uses the format:

| Group ID | Permission          | Created at | Repositories |
|----------|---------------------|------------|--------------|
| <name>   | Permission dropdown | datetime   | <number>     |

![Groups page has a dropdown to edit permission for each
group](./groups-with-perms.png)

This gives information about the group and allows editing its permission.

There are 4 default groups, named after the 4 permissions.  Each group is
global (applies for all repositories).

Clicking on the group takes us to the group's subpage with 2 tabs:

* **Members**: The current "Group Memberships" tab.
* **Repositories**: A list of configured repositories.

  This tab has an "all" toggle at the top.  If the permission is "Admin" the
  toggle is set and cannot be changed.  Otherwise it controls a selection of
  groups using the same GUI mechanism as used today for memberships (and for
  policies, ironically).

We shall add appropriate options to `lakectl` to control policies at the new
levels of granularity.

### Upgrade to simplified

On startup, lakeFS will check the KV schema version.  If it has not upgraded
to ACLs then lakeFS will check whether an upgrade is required:

* If the 4 basic policies have not been modified, and no other policies have
  been defined, and no users have attached policies: no upgrade is required.
  lakeFS will merely upgrade the KV schema version.
* Otherwise lakeFS will not start until an upgrade script runs.

#### The upgrade script

Admins will run the upgrade script if required to do so by lakeFS or if they
want to be very sure (for instance, there is a minor race condition if there
is more than one concurrent lakeFS).  We force admins to try the script on a
dry run using a `--yes` flag: without it, the script only prints the planned
changes.

The upgrade script will _ensure_ that the 4 default global groups exist, and
_modify_ existing groups to fit into the new ACLs scheme.

* When creating the 4 default global groups: if another group exists and has
  the desired name, upgrading will rename it by appending ".orig".  So after
  upgrading the 4 default global groups exist, with these known names.
* For any group, upgrading configured policies follows these rules, possibly
  **increasing** access:

  1. Any "Deny" rules are stripped, and a warning printed.
  1. "Manage own credentials" is added.
  1. If any actions outside of "fs:" are allowed, the group becomes an Admin
     group, a warning is printed, and no further changes apply.
  1. The upgrade script *unifies* repositories: If a permission applies to a
     set of repositories with a wildcard, permissions are unified to **all**
     repositories.  Otherwise they apply to the list of all repositories, in
     all the policies.
  1. The upgrade script *unifies* actions: it selects the _least_ permission
     of Read, Write, Super that contains all of the allowed actions.  If any
     allowed action contains a wildcard this still makes sense.

  All warnings link to support@ and to Slack.
* The upgrade script prints the new permissions of the group.[^1]


[^1] Even JSON-diff cannot be used report detailed changes, as many policies
	 are unified into a single policy.

### PBAC user experience with external authorization server

If lakeFS is attached to an external authorization server, the existing PBAC
GUI may continue to be used.  It is not possible to use both types of GUI at
the same time: Moving from PBAC to simplified may only be performed once and
**will** lose configuration.

## Implementation

lakeFS enforcement will remain backed by PBAC.  We shall add a "ui" field to
policies.  It will contain a structure that backs the UI:

<table>
<tr><th>Read all repos</th><th>Read repos `foo`, `bar`</th></tr>
<tr><td>
```json
{
  "statement": [
    {
      "action": ["fs:List*", "fs:Read*"],
      "effect": "allow",
      "resource": "*"
    }
  ],
  "ui": {
    "permission": "Read",
    "repositories": { "all": true }
  }
}
```
</td><td>
```json
{
  "statement": [
    {
      "action": ["fs:List*", "fs:Read*"],
      "effect": "allow",
      "resource": "foo"
    }, {
      "action": ["fs:List*", "fs:Read*"],
      "effect": "allow",
      "resource": "bar"
    }
  ],
  "ui": {
    "permission": "Read",
    "repositories": { "list": ["foo", "bar"] }
  }
}
```
</td></tr>
</table>

The UI receives and edits only the ui sub-object.  lakeFS translates it back
to a statement when the UI posts it back.  In effect PBAC statements are the
materialized form of the ui sub-object.

## Milestones

- Review and accept design
- Server-side support: add ui sub-object and ui -> statement translations
- lakectl support for simplified mode
- GUI


[auth-sec-update]:  https://docs.lakefs.io/posts/security_update.html#whats-changing
[http-stat-405]:  https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Status/405
[http-stat-501]:  https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Status/501
