docs/deploying/upgrade.md, before:

---
layout: default
title: Upgrade lakeFS
description: Upgrading lakeFS from a previous version usually just requires re-deploying with the latest image or downloading the latest version
parent: AWS Deployment
nav_order: 50
has_children: false
---

# Upgrading lakeFS
{: .no_toc }
Upgrading lakeFS from a previous version usually just requires re-deploying with the latest image (or downloading the latest version, if you're using the binary).
There are cases where the database will require a migration - check whether the [release](https://github.com/treeverse/lakeFS/releases) you are upgrading to requires that.


# Migrating from lakeFS >= 0.30.0

In case a migration is required, first stop the running lakeFS service.
Using the `lakefs` binary for the new version, run the following:

```bash
lakefs migrate up
```

Deploy (or run) the new version of lakeFS.

Note that an older version of lakeFS cannot run on a migrated database.


# Migrating from lakeFS < 0.30.0

Starting version 0.30.0, lakeFS handles your committed metadata in a [new way](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1jzD7-jun-tdU5BGapmnMBe9ovSzBvTNjXCcVztV07A4/edit?usp=sharing){: target="_blank" }, which is more robust and has better performance.
To move your existing data, you will need to run the following upgrade commands.

Verify lakeFS version >= 0.30.0:

```shell
lakefs --version
```

Migrate data from previous format:

```shell
lakefs migrate db
```

If you want to start over, discarding your existing data, you need to explicitly state this in your lakeFS configuration file.
To do so, add the following to your configuration:

```yaml
cataloger:
  type: rocks
```

Commit message:

explain mvcc upgrade path, remove base58 from deps

docs/deploying/upgrade.md, after:

---
layout: default
title: Upgrade lakeFS
description: Upgrading lakeFS from a previous version usually just requires re-deploying with the latest image or downloading the latest version
parent: AWS Deployment
nav_order: 50
has_children: false
---

# Upgrading lakeFS
{: .no_toc }
Upgrading lakeFS from a previous version usually just requires re-deploying with the latest image (or downloading the latest version, if you're using the binary).
There are cases where the database will require a migration - check whether the [release](https://github.com/treeverse/lakeFS/releases) you are upgrading to requires that.


# Migrating from lakeFS >= 0.30.0

In case a migration is required, first stop the running lakeFS service.
Using the `lakefs` binary for the new version, run the following:

```bash
lakefs migrate up
```

Deploy (or run) the new version of lakeFS.

Note that an older version of lakeFS cannot run on a migrated database.


# Migrating from lakeFS < 0.30.0

**Note:** users of lakeFS < 0.30.0 should first upgrade to 0.30.0 following this guide, before upgrading to any higher version
{: .note .pb-3 }

Starting version 0.30.0, lakeFS handles your committed metadata in a [new way](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1jzD7-jun-tdU5BGapmnMBe9ovSzBvTNjXCcVztV07A4/edit?usp=sharing){: target="_blank" }, which is more robust and has better performance.
To move your existing data, you will need to run the following upgrade commands.

Verify lakeFS version == 0.30.0:

```shell
lakefs --version
```

Migrate data from previous format:

```shell
lakefs migrate db
```

Once migrated, it is possible to now use more recent lakeFS versions. Please refer to their release notes for more information on ugrading and usage).


If you want to start over, discarding your existing data, you need to explicitly state this in your lakeFS configuration file.
To do so, add the following to your configuration (relevant **only** for 0.30.0):

```yaml
cataloger:
  type: rocks
```
