docs/quickstart/other_installations.md, before:

---
layout: default
title: Other Installations
parent: Quick Start
nav_order: 99
has_children: false
---

# Other Installation Options
{: .no_toc}

## Table of Contents
{: .no_toc .text-delta }

1. TOC
{:toc}

## On Kubernetes with Helm

You can install lakeFS on a Kubernetes cluster with the following commands:
```bash
# Add the lakeFS Helm repository
helm repo add lakefs https://charts.lakefs.io
# Deploy lakeFS with helm release "my-lakefs"
helm install my-lakefs lakefs/lakefs
```

## Manual Installation 

Alternatively, you may opt to run the lakefs binary directly on your computer.

1. Download the lakeFS binary for your operating system:

   [Download lakefs](../downloads.md){: .btn .btn-green target="_blank"}

1. Install and configure [PostgreSQL](https://www.postgresql.org/download/){:target="_blank"}

1. Create a configuration file:
    
   ```yaml
   ---
   database:
     connection_string: "postgres://localhost:5432/postgres?sslmode=disable"
    
   blockstore: 
     type: "local"
     local:
       path: "~/lakefs_data"
    
   auth:
     encrypt:
       secret_key: "a random string that should be kept secret"
   gateways:
     s3:
       domain_name: s3.local.lakefs.io:8000
   ```

1. Create a local directory to store objects:

   ```sh
   mkdir ~/lakefs_data
   ```

1. Run the server:
    
   ```bash
   ./lakefs --config /path/to/config.yaml run
   ```

Commit message:

change compose execution in quickstart and README

docs/quickstart/other_installations.md, after:

---
layout: default
title: Other Installations
parent: Quick Start
nav_order: 99
has_children: false
---

# Other Installation Options
{: .no_toc}

## Table of Contents
{: .no_toc .text-delta }

1. TOC
{:toc}

## Docker on Windows

To run a local lakeFS instance using [Docker Compose](https://docs.docker.com/compose/){:target="_blank"}:

1. Ensure you have Docker installed on your computer.

1. Run the following command in your terminal:

   ```bash
   Invoke-WebRequest https://compose.lakefs.io | Select-Object -ExpandProperty Content | docker-compose -f - up
   ```

1. Check your installation by opening [http://127.0.0.1:8000/setup](http://127.0.0.1:8000/setup){:target="_blank"} in your web browser.


## On Kubernetes with Helm

You can install lakeFS on a Kubernetes cluster with the following commands:
```bash
# Add the lakeFS Helm repository
helm repo add lakefs https://charts.lakefs.io
# Deploy lakeFS with helm release "my-lakefs"
helm install my-lakefs lakefs/lakefs
```

## Manual Installation 

Alternatively, you may opt to run the lakefs binary directly on your computer.

1. Download the lakeFS binary for your operating system:

   [Download lakefs](../downloads.md){: .btn .btn-green target="_blank"}

1. Install and configure [PostgreSQL](https://www.postgresql.org/download/){:target="_blank"}

1. Create a configuration file:
    
   ```yaml
   ---
   database:
     connection_string: "postgres://localhost:5432/postgres?sslmode=disable"
    
   blockstore: 
     type: "local"
     local:
       path: "~/lakefs_data"
    
   auth:
     encrypt:
       secret_key: "a random string that should be kept secret"
   gateways:
     s3:
       domain_name: s3.local.lakefs.io:8000
   ```

1. Create a local directory to store objects:

   ```sh
   mkdir ~/lakefs_data
   ```

1. Run the server:
    
   ```bash
   ./lakefs --config /path/to/config.yaml run
   ```
