docs/integrations/kafka.md, before:

---
layout: default
title: Kafka
description: This section explains how you can start using lakeFS with Kafka using Confluent’s S3 Sink Connector.
parent: Integrations
nav_order: 120
has_children: false
redirect_from: 
    - /using/kakfa.html
    - /integrations/kakfa.html
---

# Using lakeFS with Kafka

{: .no_toc }
[Apache Kafka](https://kafka.apache.org/) provides a unified, high-throughput, low-latency platform for handling real-time data feeds.

Different distributions of Kafka offer different methods for exporting data to S3 called Kafka Sink Connectors.

The most commonly used Connector for S3 is [Confluent's S3 Sink Connector](https://docs.confluent.io/current/connect/kafka-connect-s3/index.html).

Add the following to `connector.properties` file for lakeFS support:

```properties
# Your lakeFS repository
s3.bucket.name=example-repo

# Your lakeFS S3 endpoint and credentials
store.url=https://lakefs.example.com
aws.access.key.id=AKIAIOSFODNN7EXAMPLE
aws.secret.access.key=wJalrXUtnFEMI/K7MDENG/bPxRfiCYEXAMPLEKEY

# main being the branch we want to write to
topics.dir=main/topics 
```

Commit message:

Put list of integrations in a table & little bit of housekeeping on integrations pages (#5722)
* Put list of integrations in a table

* - Change Integrations to alphabetical ordering
- Add Apache to appropriate ASF projects

docs/integrations/kafka.md, after:

---
layout: default
title: Apache Kafka
description: This section explains how you can start using lakeFS with Apache Kafka using Confluent’s S3 Sink Connector.
parent: Integrations
has_children: false
redirect_from: 
    - /using/kakfa.html
    - /integrations/kakfa.html
---

# Using lakeFS with Kafka

{: .no_toc }
[Apache Kafka](https://kafka.apache.org/) provides a unified, high-throughput, low-latency platform for handling real-time data feeds.

Kafka Connect is part of Apache Kafka and provides a framework for integrating external systems with Kafka. Different connectors are available for Kafka Connect. The most commonly used connector for writing data to S3 from Kafka is [Confluent's S3 Sink Connector](https://docs.confluent.io/current/connect/kafka-connect-s3/index.html).

Add the following to `connector.properties` file for lakeFS support:

```properties
# Your lakeFS repository
s3.bucket.name=example-repo

# Your lakeFS S3 endpoint and credentials
store.url=https://lakefs.example.com
aws.access.key.id=AKIAIOSFODNN7EXAMPLE
aws.secret.access.key=wJalrXUtnFEMI/K7MDENG/bPxRfiCYEXAMPLEKEY

# main being the branch we want to write to
topics.dir=main/topics 
```
